Bartleby, the Scrivener A Story of Wall-Street Herman Melville I am a rather eld
 erly man. The nature of my avocations for the last thirty years has brought me 
i nto more than ordinary contact with what would seem an interesting and somewha
t singular set of men, of whom as yet nothing that I know of has ever been writt
en :-I mean the law-copyists or scriveners. I have known very many of them, prof
ess ionally and privately, and if I pleased, could relate divers histories, at w
hich good-natured gentlemen might smile, and sentimental souls might weep. But I
 wai ve the biographies of all other scriveners for a few passages in the life o
f Bar tleby, who was a scrivener the strangest I ever saw or heard of. While of 
other law-copyists I might write the complete life, of Bartleby nothing of that 
sort c an be done. I believe that no materials exist for a full and satisfactory
 biogra phy of this man. It is an irreparable loss to literature. Bartleby was o
ne of th ose beings of whom nothing is ascertainable, except from the original s
ources, a nd in his case those are very small. What my own astonished eyes saw o
f Bartleby , that is all I know of him, except, indeed, one vague report which w
ill appear in the sequel. Ere introducing the scrivener, as he first appeared to
 me, it is fit I make some mention of myself, my employees, my business, my cham
bers, and g eneral surroundings; because some such description is indispensable 
to an adequa te understanding of the chief character about to be presented. Impr
imis: I am a man who, from his youth upwards, has been filled with a profound co
nviction that the easiest way of life is the best. Hence, though I belong to a p
rofession pro verbially energetic and nervous, even to turbulence, at times, yet
 nothing of th at sort have I ever suffered to invade my peace. I am one of thos
e unambitious l awyers who never addresses a jury, or in any way draws down publ
ic applause; but in the cool tranquillity of a snug retreat, do a snug business 
among rich men's bonds and mortgages and title-deeds. All who know me, consider 
me an eminently safe man. The late John Jacob Astor, a personage little given to
 poetic enthusia sm, had no hesitation in pronouncing my first grand point to be
 prudence; my nex t, method. I do not speak it in vanity, but simply record the 
fact, that I was n ot unemployed in my profession by the late John Jacob Astor; 
a name which, I adm it, I love to repeat, for it hath a rounded and orbicular so
und to it, and rings like unto bullion. I will freely add, that I was not insens
ible to the late Joh n Jacob Astor's good opinion. Some time prior to the period
 at which this little history begins, my avocations had been largely increased. 
The good old office, now extinct in the State of New-York, of a Master in Chance
ry, had been conferre d upon me. It was not a very arduous office, but very plea
santly remunerative. I seldom lose my temper; much more seldom indulge in danger
ous indignation at wro ngs and outrages; but I must be permitted to be rash here
 and declare, that I co nsider the sudden and violent abrogation of the office o
f Master in Chancery, by the new Constitution, as a--premature act; inasmuch as 
I had counted upon a lif e-lease of the profits, whereas I only received those o
f a few short years. But this is by the way. My chambers were up stairs at No.-W
all-street. At one end th ey looked upon the white wall of the interior of a spa
cious skylight shaft, pene trating the building from top to bottom. This view mi
ght have been considered ra ther tame than otherwise, deficient in what landscap
e painters call ``life.'' Bu t if so, the view from the other end of my chambers
 offered, at least, a contras t, if nothing more. In that direction my windows c
ommanded an unobstructed view of a lofty brick wall, black by age and everlastin
g shade; which wall required n o spy-glass to bring out its lurking beauties, bu
t for the benefit of all near-s ighted spectators, was pushed up to within ten f
eet of my window panes. Owing to the great height of the surrounding buildings, 
and my chambers being on the sec ond floor, the interval between this wall and m
ine not a little resembled a huge square cistern. At the period just preceding t
he advent of Bartleby, I had two persons as copyists in my employment, and a pro
mising lad as an office-boy. Firs t, Turkey; second, Nippers; third, Ginger Nut.
 These may seem names, the like of which are not usually found in the Directory.
 In truth they were nicknames, mut ually conferred upon each other by my three c
lerks, and were deemed expressive o f their respective persons or characters. Tu
rkey was a short, pursy Englishman o f about my own age, that is, somewhere not 
far from sixty. In the morning, one m ight say, his face was of a fine florid hu
e, but after twelve o'clock, meridian- his dinner hour-it blazed like a grate fu
ll of Christmas coals; and continued bl azing-but, as it were, with a gradual wa
ne-till 6 o'clock, {p.m.} or thereabouts , after which I saw no more of the prop
rietor of the face, which gaining its mer idian with the sun, seemed to set with
 it, to rise, culminate, and decline the f ollowing day, with the like regularit
y and undiminished glory. There are many si ngular coincidences I have known in 
the course of my life, not the least among w hich was the fact, that exactly whe
n Turkey displayed his fullest beams from his red and radiant countenance, just 
then, too, at that critical moment, began the daily period when I considered his
 business capacities as seriously disturbed f or the remainder of the twenty-fou
r hours. Not that he was absolutely idle, or a verse to business then; far from 
it. The difficulty was, he was apt to be altoge ther too energetic. There was a 
strange, inflamed, flurried, flighty recklessnes s of activity about him. He wou
ld be incautious in dipping his pen into his inks tand. All his blots upon my do
cuments, were dropped there after twelve o'clock, meridian. Indeed, not only wou
ld he be reckless and sadly given to making blots in the afternoon, but some day
s he went further, and was rather noisy. At such t imes, too, his face flamed wi
th augmented blazonry, as if cannel coal had been h eaped on anthracite. He made
 an unpleasant racket with his chair; spilled his sa nd-box; in mending his pens
, impatiently split them all to pieces, and threw the m on the floor in a sudden
 passion; stood up and leaned over his table, boxing h is papers about in a most
 indecorous manner, very sad to behold in an elderly ma n like him. Nevertheless
, as he was in many ways a most valuable person to me, a nd all the time before 
twelve o'clock, meridian, was the quickest, steadiest cre ature too, accomplishi
ng a great deal of work in a style not easy to be matched- for these reasons, I 
was willing to overlook his eccentricities, though indeed, occasionally, I remon
strated with him. I did this very gently, however, because, though the civilest,
 nay, the blandest and most reverential of men in the morni ng, yet in the after
noon he was disposed, upon provocation, to be slightly rash with his tongue, in 
fact, insolent. Now, valuing his morning services as I did, and resolved not to 
lose them; yet, at the same time made uncomfortable by his i nflamed ways after 
twelve o'clock; and being a man of peace, unwilling by my adm onitions to call f
orth unseemly retorts from him; I took upon me, one Saturday n oon (he was alway
s worse on Saturdays), to hint to him, very kindly, that perhap s now that he wa
s growing old, it might be well to abridge his labors; in short, he need not com
e to my chambers after twelve o'clock, but, dinner over, had bes t go home to hi
s lodgings and rest himself till tea-time. But no; he insisted up on his afterno
on devotions. His countenance became intolerably fervid, as he ora torically ass
ured me-gesticulating with a long ruler at the other end of the roo m-that if hi
s services in the morning were useful, how indispensable, then, in t he afternoo
n? ``With submission, sir,'' said Turkey on this occasion, ``I consid er myself 
your right-hand man. In the morning I but marshal and deploy my column s; but in
 the afternoon I put myself at their head, and gallantly charge the foe , thus!'
'-and he made a violent thrust with the ruler. ``But the blots, Turkey,' ' intim
ated I. ``True,-but, with submission, sir, behold these hairs! I am getti ng old
. Surely, sir, a blot or two of a warm afternoon is not to be severely urg ed ag
ainst gray hairs. Old age-even if it blot the page-is honorable. With submi ssio
n, sir, we both are getting old.'' This appeal to my fellow-feeling was hard ly 
to be resisted. At all events, I saw that go he would not. So I made up my mi nd
 to let him stay, resolving, nevertheless, to see to it, that during the after n
oon he had to do with my less important papers. Nippers, the second on my list, 
was a whiskered, sallow, and, upon the whole, rather piratical-looking young ma 
n of about five and twenty. I always deemed him the victim of two evil powers-am
 bition and indigestion. The ambition was evinced by a certain impatience of the
 duties of a mere copyist, an unwarrantable usurpation of strictly professional 
a ffairs, such as the original drawing up of legal documents. The indigestion se
em ed betokened in an occasional nervous testiness and grinning irritability, ca
usi ng the teeth to audibly grind together over mistakes committed in copying; u
nnec essary maledictions, hissed, rather than spoken, in the heat of business; a
nd es pecially by a continual discontent with the height of the table where he w
orked. Though of a very ingenious mechanical turn, Nippers could never get this 
table to suit him. He put chips under it, blocks of various sorts, bits of paste
board, and at last went so far as to attempt an exquisite adjustment by final pi
eces o f folded blotting paper. But no invention would answer. If, for the sake 
of easi ng his back, he brought the table lid at a sharp angle well up towards h
is chin, and wrote there like a man using the steep roof of a Dutch house for hi
s desk:- then he declared that it stopped the circulation in his arms. If now he
 lowered the table to his waistbands, and stooped over it in writing, then there
 was a so re aching in his back. In short, the truth of the matter was, Nippers 
knew not w hat he wanted. Or, if he wanted any thing, it was to be rid of a scri
vener's tab le altogether. Among the manifestations of his diseased ambition was
 a fondness he had for receiving visits from certain ambiguous-looking fellows i
n seedy coat s, whom he called his clients. Indeed I was aware that not only was
 he, at times , considerable of a ward-politician, but he occasionally did a lit
tle business a t the Justices' courts, and was not unknown on the steps of the T
ombs. I have go od reason to believe, however, that one individual who called up
on him at my cha mbers, and who, with a grand air, he insisted was his client, w
as no other than a dun, and the alleged title-deed, a bill. But with all his fai
lings, and the an noyances he caused me, Nippers, like his compatriot Turkey, wa
s a very useful ma n to me; wrote a neat, swift hand; and, when he chose, was no
t deficient in a ge ntlemanly sort of deportment. Added to this, he always dress
ed in a gentlemanly sort of way; and so, incidentally, reflected credit upon my 
chambers. Whereas wi th respect to Turkey, I had much ado to keep him from being
 a reproach to me. Hi s clothes were apt to look oily and smell of eating-houses
. He wore his pantaloo ns very loose and baggy in summer. His coats were execabl
e; his hat not to be ha ndled. But while the hat was a thing of indifference to 
me, inasmuch as his natu ral civility and deference, as a dependent Englishman, 
always led him to doff it the moment he entered the room, yet his coat was anoth
er matter. Concerning his coats, I reasoned with him; but with no effect. The tr
uth was, I suppose, that a man with so small an income, could not afford to spor
t such a lustrous face an d a lustrous coat at one and the same time. As Nippers
 once observed, Turkey's m oney went chiefly for red ink. One winter day I prese
nted Turkey with a highly-r espectable looking coat of my own, a padded gray coa
t, of a most comfortable war mth, and which buttoned straight up from the knee t
o the neck. I thought Turkey would appreciate the favor, and abate his rashness 
and obstreperousness of after noons. But no. I verily believe that buttoning him
self up in so downy and blanke t-like a coat had a pernicious effect upon him; u
pon the same principle that too much oats are bad for horses. In fact, precisely
 as a rash, restive horse is sa id to feel his oats, so Turkey felt his coat. It
 made him insolent. He was a man whom prosperity harmed. Though concerning the s
elf-indulgent habits of Turkey I had my own private surmises, yet touching Nippe
rs I was well persuaded that wha tever might be his faults in other respects, he
 was, at least, a temperate young man. But indeed, nature herself seemed to have
 been his vintner, and at his bir th charged him so thoroughly with an irritable
, brandy-like disposition, that al l subsequent potations were needless. When I 
consider how, amid the stillness of my chambers, Nippers would sometimes impatie
ntly rise from his seat, and stoopi ng over his table, spread his arms wide apar
t, seize the whole desk, and move it , and jerk it, with a grim, grinding motion
 on the floor, as if the table were a perverse voluntary agent, intent on thwart
ing and vexing him; I plainly perceiv e that for Nippers, brandy and water were 
altogether superfluous. It was fortuna te for me that, owing to its peculiar cau
se-indigestion-the irritability and con sequent nervousness of Nippers, were mai
nly observable in the morning, while in the afternoon he was comparatively mild.
 So that Turkey's paroxysms only coming on about twelve o'clock, I never had to 
do with their eccentricities at one time . Their fits relieved each other like g
uards. When Nippers' was on, Turkey's was off; and vice versa. This was a good n
atural arrangement under the circumstance s. Ginger Nut, the third on my list, w
as a lad some twelve years old. His father was a carman, ambitious of seeing his
 son on the bench instead of a cart, befor e he died. So he sent him to my offic
e as student at law, errand boy, and cleane r and sweeper, at the rate of one do
llar a week. He had a little desk to himself , but he did not use it much. Upon 
inspection, the drawer exhibited a great arra y of the shells of various sorts o
f nuts. Indeed, to this quick-witted youth the whole noble science of the law wa
s contained in a nut-shell. Not the least amon g the employments of Ginger Nut, 
as well as one which he discharged with the mos t alacrity, was his duty as cake
 and apple purveyor for Turkey and Nippers. Copy ing law papers being proverbial
ly a dry, husky sort of business, my two scrivene rs were fain to moisten their 
mouths very often with Spitzenbergs to be had at t he numerous stalls nigh the C
ustom House and Post Office. Also, they sent Ginger Nut very frequently for that
 peculiar cake-small, flat, round, and very spicy-a fter which he had been named
 by them. Of a cold morning when business was but du ll, Turkey would gobble up 
scores of these cakes, as if they were mere wafers-in deed they sell them at the
 rate of six or eight for a penny-the scrape of his pe n blending with the crunc
hing of the crisp particles in his mouth. Of all the fi ery afternoon blunders a
nd flurried rashnesses of Turkey, was his once moistenin g a ginger-cake between
 his lips, and clapping it on to a mortgage for a seal. I came within an ace of 
dismissing him then. But he mollified me by making an ori ental bow, and saying-
``With submission, sir, it was generous of me to find you in stationery on my ow
n account.'' Now my original business-that of a conveyance r and title hunter, a
nd drawer-up of recondite documents of all sorts-was consid erably increased by 
receiving the master's office. There was now great work for scriveners. Not only
 must I push the clerks already with me, but I must have add itional help. In an
swer to my advertisement, a motionless young man one morning, stood upon my offi
ce threshold, the door being open, for it was summer. I can s ee that figure now
-pallidly neat, pitiably respectable, incurably forlorn! It wa s Bartleby. After
 a few words touching his qualifications, I engaged him, glad t o have among my 
corps of copyists a man of so singularly sedate an aspect, which I thought might
 operate beneficially upon the flighty temper of Turkey, and the fiery one of Ni
ppers. I should have stated before that ground glass folding-doo rs divided my p
remises into two parts, one of which was occupied by my scrivener s, the other b
y myself. According to my humor I threw open these doors, or close d them. I res
olved to assign Bartleby a corner by the folding-doors, but on my s ide of them,
 so as to have this quiet man within easy call, in case any trifling thing was t
o be done. I placed his desk close up to a small side-window in that part of the
 room, a window which originally had afforded a lateral view of cert ain grimy b
ack-yards and bricks, but which, owing to subsequent erections, comma nded at pr
esent no view at all, though it gave some light. Within three feet of the panes 
was a wall, and the light came down from far above, between two lofty buildings,
 as from a very small opening in a dome. Still further to a satisfacto ry arrang
ement, I procured a high green folding screen, which might entirely iso late Bar
tleby from my sight, though not remove him from my voice. And thus, in a manner,
 privacy and society were conjoined. At first Bartleby did an extraordin ary qua
ntity of writing. As if long famishing for something to copy, he seemed t o gorg
e himself on my documents. There was no pause for digestion. He ran a day and ni
ght line, copying by sun-light and by candle-light. I should have been qui te de
lighted with his application, had he been cheerfully industrious. But he wr ote 
on silently, palely, mechanically. It is, of course, an indispensable part o f a
 scrivener's business to verify the accuracy of his copy, word by word. Where th
ere are two or more scriveners in an office, they assist each other in this e xa
mination, one reading from the copy, the other holding the original. It is a v e
ry dull, wearisome, and lethargic affair. I can readily imagine that to some sa 
nguine temperaments it would be altogether intolerable. For example, I cannot cr
 edit that the mettlesome poet Byron would have contentedly sat down with Bartle
b y to examine a law document of, say five hundred pages, closely written in a c
ri mpy hand. Now and then, in the haste of business, it had been my habit to ass
ist in comparing some brief document myself, calling Turkey or Nippers for this 
pur pose. One object I had in placing Bartleby so handy to me behind the screen,
 was to avail myself of his services on such trivial occasions. It was on the th
ird day, I think, of his being with me, and before any necessity had arisen for 
havi ng his own writing examined, that, being much hurried to complete a small a
ffair I had in hand, I abruptly called to Bartleby. In my haste and natural expe
ctanc y of instant compliance, I sat with my head bent over the original on my d
esk, a nd my right hand sideways, and somewhat nervously extended with the copy,
 so tha t immediately upon emerging from his retreat, Bartleby might snatch it a
nd proce ed to business without the least delay. In this very attitude did I sit
 when I c alled to him, rapidly stating what it was I wanted him to do-namely, t
o examine a small paper with me. Imagine my surprise, nay, my consternation, whe
n without moving from his privacy, Bartleby in a singularly mild, firm voice, re
plied, ``I would prefer not to.'' I sat awhile in perfect silence, rallying my s
tunned fac ulties. Immediately it occurred to me that my ears had deceived me, o
r Bartleby had entirely misunderstood my meaning. I repeated my request in the c
learest ton e I could assume. But in quite as clear a one came the previous repl
y, ``I would prefer not to.'' ``Prefer not to,'' echoed I, rising in high excite
ment, and cr ossing the room with a stride. ``What do you mean? Are you moon-str
uck? I want y ou to help me compare this sheet here-take it,'' and I thrust it t
owards him. `` I would prefer not to,'' said he. I looked at him steadfastly. Hi
s face was lean ly composed; his gray eye dimly calm. Not a wrinkle of agitation
 rippled him. Ha d there been the least uneasiness, anger, impatience or imperti
nence in his mann er; in other words, had there been any thing ordinarily human 
about him, doubtle ss I should have violently dismissed him from the premises. B
ut as it was, I sho uld have as soon thought of turning my pale plaster-of-paris
 bust of Cicero out of doors. I stood gazing at him awhile, as he went on with h
is own writing, and then reseated myself at my desk. This is very strange, thoug
ht I. What had one b est do? But my business hurried me. I concluded to forget t
he matter for the pre sent, reserving it for my future leisure. So calling Nippe
rs from the other room , the paper was speedily examined. A few days after this,
 Bartleby concluded fou r lengthy documents, being quadruplicates of a week's te
stimony taken before me in my High Court of Chancery. It became necessary to exa
mine them. It was an imp ortant suit, and great accuracy was imperative. Having 
all things arranged I cal led Turkey, Nippers and Ginger Nut from the next room,
 meaning to place the four copies in the hands of my four clerks, while I should
 read from the original. A ccordingly Turkey, Nippers and Ginger Nut had taken t
heir seats in a row, each w ith his document in hand, when I called to Bartleby 
to join this interesting gro up. ``Bartleby! quick, I am waiting.'' I heard a sl
ow scrape of his chair legs o n the uncarpeted floor, and soon he appeared stand
ing at the entrance of his her mitage. ``What is wanted?'' said he mildly. ``The
 copies, the copies'' said I hu rriedly. ``We are going to examine them. There''
-and I held towards him the four th quadruplicate. ``I would prefer not to,'' he
 said, and gently disappeared beh ind the screen. For a few moments I was turned
 into a pillar of salt, standing a t the head of my seated column of clerks. Rec
overing myself, I advanced towards the screen, and demanded the reason for such 
extraordinary conduct. ``Why do you refuse?'' ``I would prefer not to.'' With an
y other man I should have flown out right into a dreadful passion, scorned all f
urther words, and thrust him ignomin iously from my presence. But there was some
thing about Bartleby that not only st rangely disarmed me, but in a wonderful ma
nner touched and disconcerted me. I be gan to reason with him. ``These are your 
own copies we are about to examine. It is labor saving to you, because one exami
nation will answer for your four papers . It is common usage. Every copyist is b
ound to help examine his copy. Is it not so? Will you not speak? Answer!'' ``I p
refer not to,'' he replied in a flute-li ke tone. It seemed to me that while I h
ad been addressing him, he carefully revo lved every statement that I made; full
y comprehended the meaning; could not gain say the irresistible conclusion; but,
 at the same time, some paramount considera tion prevailed with him to reply as 
he did. ``You are decided, then, not to comp ly with my request-a request made a
ccording to common usage and common sense?'' He briefly gave me to understand th
at on that point my judgment was sound. Yes: his decision was irreversible. It i
s not seldom the case that when a man is brow beaten in some unprecedented and v
iolently unreasonable way, he begins to stagge r in his own plainest faith. He b
egins, as it were, vaguely to surmise that, won derful as it may be, all the jus
tice and all the reason is on the other side. Ac cordingly, if any disinterested
 persons are present, he turns to them for some r einforcement for his own falte
ring mind. ``Turkey,'' said I, ``what do you think of this? Am I not right?'' ``
With submission, sir,'' said Turkey, with his blan dest tone, ``I think that you
 are.'' ``Nippers,'' said I, ``what do you think of it?'' ``I think I should kic
k him out of the office.'' (The reader of nice perc eptions will here perceive t
hat, it being morning, Turkey's answer is couched in polite and tranquil terms, 
but Nippers replies in ill-tempered ones. Or, to rep eat a previous sentence, Ni
ppers's ugly mood was on duty, and Turkey's off.) ``G inger Nut,'' said I, willi
ng to enlist the smallest suffrage in my behalf, ``wha t do you think of it?'' `
`I think, sir, he's a little luny,'' replied Ginger Nut , with a grin. ``You hea
r what they say,'' said I, turning towards the screen, ` `come forth and do your
 duty.'' But he vouchsafed no reply. I pondered a moment in sore perplexity. But
 once more business hurried me. I determined again to pos tpone the consideratio
n of this dilemma to my future leisure. With a little trou ble we made out to ex
amine the papers without Bartleby, though at every page or two, Turkey deferenti
ally dropped his opinion that this proceeding was quite out of the common; while
 Nippers, twitching in his chair with a dyspeptic nervousne ss, ground out betwe
en his set teeth occasional hissing maledictions against the stubborn oaf behind
 the screen. And for his (Nippers's) part, this was the firs t and the last time
 he would do another man's business without pay. Meanwhile Ba rtleby sat in his 
hermitage, oblivious to every thing but his own peculiar busin ess there. Some d
ays passed, the scrivener being employed upon another lengthy w ork. His late re
markable conduct led me to regard his ways narrowly. I observed that he never we
nt to dinner; indeed that he never went any where. As yet I had never of my pers
onal knowledge known him to be outside of my office. He was a pe rpetual sentry 
in the corner. At about eleven o'clock though, in the morning, I noticed that Gi
nger Nut would advance toward the opening in Bartleby's screen, a s if silently 
beckoned thither by a gesture invisible to me where I sat. The boy would then le
ave the office jingling a few pence, and reappear with a handful o f ginger-nuts
 which he delivered in the hermitage, receiving two of the cakes fo r his troubl
e. He lives, then, on ginger-nuts, thought I; never eats a dinner, p roperly spe
aking; he must be a vegetarian then; but no; he never eats even veget ables, he 
eats nothing but ginger-nuts. My mind then ran on in reveries concerni ng the pr
obable effects upon the human constitution of living entirely on ginger -nuts. G
inger-nuts are so called because they contain ginger as one of their pec uliar c
onstituents, and the final flavoring one. Now what was ginger? A hot, spi cy thi
ng. Was Bartleby hot and spicy? Not at all. Ginger, then, had no effect up on Ba
rtleby. Probably he preferred it should have none. Nothing so aggravates an earn
est person as a passive resistance. If the individual so resisted be of a n ot i
nhumane temper, and the resisting one perfectly harmless in his passivity; t hen
, in the better moods of the former, he will endeavor charitably to construe to 
his imagination what proves impossible to be solved by his judgment. Even so, fo
r the most part, I regarded Bartleby and his ways. Poor fellow! thought I, he me
ans no mischief; it is plain he intends no insolence; his aspect sufficiently ev
inces that his eccentricities are involuntary. He is useful to me. I can get alo
ng with him. If I turn him away, the chances are he will fall in with some le ss
 indulgent employer, and then he will be rudely treated, and perhaps driven fo r
th miserably to starve. Yes. Here I can cheaply purchase a delicious self-appro 
val. To befriend Bartleby; to humor him in his strange wilfulness, will cost me 
little or nothing, while I lay up in my soul what will eventually prove a sweet 
morsel for my conscience. But this mood was not invariable with me. The passiven
 ess of Bartleby sometimes irritated me. I felt strangely goaded on to encounter
 him in new opposition, to elicit some angry spark from him answerable to my own
. But indeed I might as well have essayed to strike fire with my knuckles agains
t a bit of Windsor soap. But one afternoon the evil impulse in me mastered me, a
n d the following little scene ensued: ``Bartleby,'' said I, ``when those papers
 a re all copied, I will compare them with you.'' ``I would prefer not to.'' ``H
ow? Surely you do not mean to persist in that mulish vagary?'' No answer. I thre
w o pen the folding-doors near by, and turning upon Turkey and Nippers, exclaime
d in an excited manner- ``He says, a second time, he won't examine his papers. W
hat do you think of it, Turkey?'' It was afternoon, be it remembered. Turkey sat
 glo wing like a brass boiler, his bald head steaming, his hands reeling among h
is bl otted papers. ``Think of it?'' roared Turkey; ``I think I'll just step beh
ind hi s screen, and black his eyes for him!'' So saying, Turkey rose to his fee
t and t hrew his arms into a pugilistic position. He was hurrying away to make g
ood his promise, when I detained him, alarmed at the effect of incautiously rous
ing Turk ey's combativeness after dinner. ``Sit down, Turkey,'' said I, ``and he
ar what N ippers has to say. What do you think of it, Nippers? Would I not be ju
stified in immediately dismissing Bartleby?'' ``Excuse me, that is for you to de
cide, sir. I think his conduct quite unusual, and indeed unjust, as regards Turk
ey and mys elf. But it may only be a passing whim.'' ``Ah,'' exclaimed I, ``you 
have strang ely changed your mind then-you speak very gently of him now.'' ``All
 beer,'' cri ed Turkey; ``gentleness is effects of beer-Nippers and I dined toge
ther to-day. You see how gentle I am, sir. Shall I go and black his eyes?'' ``Yo
u refer to Ba rtleby, I suppose. No, not to-day, Turkey,'' I replied; ``pray, pu
t up your fist s.'' I closed the doors, and again advanced towards Bartleby. I f
elt additional incentives tempting me to my fate. I burned to be rebelled agains
t again. I reme mbered that Bartleby never left the office. ``Bartleby,'' said I
, ``Ginger Nut i s away; just step round to the Post Office, won't you? ( it was
 but a three minu tes' walk,) and see if there is any thing for me.'' ``I would 
prefer not to.'' ` `You will not?'' ``I prefer not.'' I staggered to my desk, an
d sat there in a de ep study. My blind inveteracy returned. Was there any other 
thing in which I cou ld procure myself to be ignominiously repulsed by this lean
, penniless wight?-my hired clerk? What added thing is there, perfectly reasonab
le, that he will be s ure to refuse to do? ``Bartleby!'' No answer. ``Bartleby,'
' in a louder tone. No answer. ``Bartleby,'' I roared. Like a very ghost, agreea
bly to the laws of mag ical invocation, at the third summons, he appeared at the
 entrance of his hermit age. ``Go to the next room, and tell Nippers to come to 
me.'' ``I prefer not to, '' he respectfully and slowly said, and mildly disappea
red. ``Very good, Bartleb y,'' said I, in a quiet sort of serenely severe self-p
ossessed tone, intimating the unalterable purpose of some terrible retribution v
ery close at hand. At the moment I half intended something of the kind. But upon
 the whole, as it was draw ing towards my dinner-hour, I thought it best to put 
on my hat and walk home for the day, suffering much from perplexity and distress
 of mind. Shall I acknowled ge it? The conclusion of this whole business was, th
at it soon became a fixed fa ct of my chambers, that a pale young scrivener, by 
the name of Bartleby, had a d esk there; that he copied for me at the usual rate
 of four cents a folio (one hu ndred words); but he was permanently exempt from 
examining the work done by him, that duty being transferred to Turkey and Nipper
s, out of compliment doubtless to their superior acuteness; moreover, said Bartl
eby was never on any account to be dispatched on the most trivial errand of any 
sort; and that even if entreate d to take upon him such a matter, it was general
ly understood that he would pref er not to-in other words, that he would refuse 
point-blank. As days passed on, I became considerably reconciled to Bartleby. Hi
s steadiness, his freedom from al l dissipation, his incessant industry (except 
when he chose to throw himself int o a standing revery behind his screen), his g
reat stillness, his unalterableness of demeanor under all circumstances, made hi
m a valuable acquisition. One prime thing was this,-he was always there;-first i
n the morning, continually through the day, and the last at night. I had a singu
lar confidence in his honesty. I fe lt my most precious papers perfectly safe in
 his hands. Sometimes to be sure I c ould not, for the very soul of me, avoid fa
lling into sudden spasmodic passions with him. For it was exceeding difficult to
 bear in mind all the time those stra nge peculiarities, privileges, and unheard
 of exemptions, forming the tacit stip ulations on Bartleby's part under which h
e remained in my office. Now and then, in the eagerness of dispatching pressing 
business, I would inadvertently summon Bartleby, in a short, rapid tone, to put 
his finger, say, on the incipient tie o f a bit of red tape with which I was abo
ut compressing some papers. Of course, f rom behind the screen the usual answer,
 ``I prefer not to,'' was sure to come; a nd then, how could a human creature wi
th common infirmities of our nature, refra in from bitterly exclaiming upon such
 perverseness-such unreasonableness. Howeve r, every added repulse of this sort 
which I received only tended to lessen the p robability of my repeating the inad
vertence. Here it must be said, that accordin g to the customs of most legal gen
tlemen occupying chambers in densely-populated law buildings, there were several
 keys to my door. One was kept by a woman resi ding in the attic, which person w
eekly scrubbed and daily swept and dusted my ap artments. Another was kept by Tu
rkey for convenience sake. The third I sometimes carried in my own pocket. The f
ourth I knew not who had. Now, one Sunday mornin g I happened to go to Trinity C
hurch, to hear a celebrated preacher, and finding myself rather early on the gro
und, I thought I would walk round to my chambers for a while. Luckily I had my k
ey with me; but upon applying it to the lock, I f ound it resisted by something 
inserted from the inside. Quite surprised, I calle d out; when to my consternati
on a key was turned from within; and thrusting his lean visage at me, and holdin
g the door ajar, the apparition of Bartleby appeare d, in his shirt sleeves, and
 otherwise in a strangely tattered dishabille, sayin g quietly that he was sorry
, but he was deeply engaged just then, and-preferred not admitting me at present
. In a brief word or two, he moreover added, that per haps I had better walk rou
nd the block two or three times, and by that time he w ould probably have conclu
ded his affairs. Now, the utterly unsurmised appearance of Bartleby, tenanting m
y law-chambers of a Sunday morning, with his cadaverous ly gentlemanly nonchalan
ce, yet withal firm and self-possessed, had such a stran ge effect upon me, that
 incontinently I slunk away from my own door, and did as desired. But not withou
t sundry twinges of impotent rebellion against the mild e ffrontery of this unac
countable scrivener. Indeed, it was his wonderful mildness chiefly, which not on
ly disarmed me, but unmanned me, as it were. For I conside r that one, for the t
ime, is a sort of unmanned when he tranquilly permits his h ired clerk to dictat
e to him, and order him away from his own premises. Furtherm ore, I was full of 
uneasiness as to what Bartleby could possibly be doing in my office in his shirt
 sleeves, and in an otherwise dismantled condition of a Sunda y morning. Was any
 thing amiss going on? Nay, that was out of the question. It w as not to be thou
ght of for a moment that Bartleby was an immoral person. But wh at could he be d
oing there?-copying? Nay again, whatever might be his eccentrici ties, Bartleby 
was an eminently decorous person. He would be the last man to sit down to his de
sk in any state approaching to nudity. Besides, it was Sunday; an d there was so
mething about Bartleby that forbade the supposition that he would by any secular
 occupation violate the proprieties of the day. Nevertheless, my m ind was not p
acified; and full of a restless curiosity, at last I returned to th e door. With
out hindrance I inserted my key, opened it, and entered. Bartleby wa s not to be
 seen. I looked round anxiously, peeped behind his screen; but it was very plain
 that he was gone. Upon more closely examining the place, I surmised that for an
 indefinite period Bartleby must have ate, dressed, and slept in my o ffice, and
 that too without plate, mirror, or bed. The cushioned seat of a ricke tty old s
ofa in one corner bore the faint impress of a lean, reclining form. Rol led away
 under his desk, I found a blanket; under the empty grate, a blacking bo x and b
rush; on a chair, a tin basin, with soap and a ragged towel; in a newspap er a f
ew crumbs of ginger-nuts and a morsel of cheese. Yes, thought I, it is evi dent 
enough that Bartleby has been making his home here, keeping bachelor's hall all 
by himself. Immediately then the thought came sweeping across me, What mise rabl
e friendlessness and loneliness are here revealed! His poverty is great; but his
 solitude, how horrible! Think of it. Of a Sunday, Wall-street is deserted a s P
etra; and every night of every day it is an emptiness. This building too, whi ch
 of week-days hums with industry and life, at nightfall echoes with sheer vaca n
cy, and all through Sunday is forlorn. And here Bartleby makes his home; sole s 
pectator of a solitude which he has seen all populous-a sort of innocent and tra
 nsformed Marius brooding among the ruins of Carthage! For the first time in my 
l ife a feeling of overpowering stinging melancholy seized me. Before, I had nev
er experienced aught but a not-unpleasing sadness. The bond of a common humanity
 n ow drew me irresistibly to gloom. A fraternal melancholy! For both I and Bart
leb y were sons of Adam. I remembered the bright silks and sparkling faces I had
 see n that day, in gala trim, swan-like sailing down the Mississippi of Broadwa
y; an d I contrasted them with the pallid copyist, and thought to myself, Ah, ha
ppines s courts the light, so we deem the world is gay; but misery hides aloof, 
so we d eem that misery there is none. These sad fancyings-chimeras, doubtless, 
of a sic k and silly brain-led on to other and more special thoughts, concerning
 the ecce ntricities of Bartleby. Presentiments of strange discoveries hovered r
ound me. T he scrivener's pale form appeared to me laid out, among uncaring stra
ngers, in i ts shivering winding sheet. Suddenly I was attracted by Bartleby's c
losed desk, the key in open sight left in the lock. I mean no mischief, seek the
 gratificati on of no heartless curiosity, thought I; besides, the desk is mine,
 and its cont ents too, so I will make bold to look within. Every thing was meth
odically arran ged, the papers smoothly placed. The pigeon holes were deep, and 
removing the fi les of documents, I groped into their recesses. Presently I felt
 something there , and dragged it out. It was an old bandanna handkerchief, heav
y and knotted. I opened it, and saw it was a saving's bank. I now recalled all t
he quiet mysterie s which I had noted in the man. I remembered that he never spo
ke but to answer; that though at intervals he had considerable time to himself, 
yet I had never se en him reading-no, not even a newspaper; that for long period
s he would stand lo oking out, at his pale window behind the screen, upon the de
ad brick wall; I was quite sure he never visited any refectory or eating house; 
while his pale face clearly indicated that he never drank beer like Turkey, or t
ea and coffee even, like other men; that he never went any where in particular t
hat I could learn; n ever went out for a walk, unless indeed that was the case a
t present; that he ha d declined telling who he was, or whence he came, or wheth
er he had any relative s in the world; that though so thin and pale, he never co
mplained of ill health. And more than all, I remembered a certain unconscious ai
r of pallid-how shall I call it?-of pallid haughtiness, say, or rather an auster
e reserve about him, wh ich had positively awed me into my tame compliance with 
his eccentricities, when I had feared to ask him to do the slightest incidental 
thing for me, even thoug h I might know, from his long-continued motionlessness,
 that behind his screen h e must be standing in one of those dead-wall reveries 
of his. Revolving all thes e things, and coupling them with the recently discove
red fact that he made my of fice his constant abiding place and home, and not fo
rgetful of his morbid moodin ess; revolving all these things, a prudential feeli
ng began to steal over me. My first emotions had been those of pure melancholy a
nd sincerest pity; but just i n proportion as the forlornness of Bartleby grew a
nd grew to my imagination, did that same melancholy merge into fear, that pity i
nto repulsion. So true it is, and so terrible too, that up to a certain point th
e thought or sight of misery e nlists our best affections; but, in certain speci
al cases, beyond that point it does not. They err who would assert that invariab
ly this is owing to the inheren t selfishness of the human heart. It rather proc
eeds from a certain hopelessness of remedying excessive and organic ill. To a se
nsitive being, pity is not seldo m pain. And when at last it is perceived that s
uch pity cannot lead to effectual succor, common sense bids the soul be rid of i
t. What I saw that morning persua ded me that the scrivener was the victim of in
nate and incurable disorder. I mig ht give alms to his body; but his body did no
t pain him; it was his soul that su ffered, and his soul I could not reach. I di
d not accomplish the purpose of goin g to Trinity Church that morning. Somehow, 
the things I had seen disqualified me for the time from church-going. I walked h
omeward, thinking what I would do wit h Bartleby. Finally, I resolved upon this;
-I wold put certain calm questions to him the next morning, touching his history
, &c., and if he declined to answer th em openly and unreservedly (and I suppose
d he would prefer not), then to give hi m a twenty dollar bill over and above wh
atever I might owe him, and tell him his services were no longer required; but t
hat if in any other way I could assist h im, I would be happy to do so, especial
ly if he desired to return to his native place, wherever that might be, I would 
willingly help to defray the expenses. Mo reover, if, after reaching home, he fo
und himself at any time in want of aid, le tter from him would be sure of a repl
y. The next morning came. ``Bartleby,'' sai d I, gently calling to him behind hi
s screen. No reply. ``Bartleby,'' said I, in a still gentler tone, ``come here; 
I am not going to ask you to do any thing yo u would prefer not to do-I simply w
ish to speak to you.'' Upon this he noiseless ly slid into view. ``Will you tell
 me, Bartleby, where you were born?'' ``I woul d prefer not to.'' ``Will you tel
l me any thing about yourself?'' ``I would pref er not to.'' ``But what reasonab
le objection can you have to speak to me? I feel friendly towards you.'' He did 
not look at me while I spoke, but kept his glanc e fixed upon my bust of Cicero,
 which as I then sat, was directly behind me, som e six inches above my head. ``
What is your answer, Bartleby?'' said I, after wai ting a considerable time for 
a reply, during which his countenance remained immo vable, only there was the fa
intest conceivable tremor of the white attenuated mo uth. ``At present I prefer 
to give no answer,'' he said, and retired into his he rmitage. It was rather wea
k in me I confess, but his manner on this occasion net tled me. Not only did the
re seem to lurk in it a certain calm disdain, but his p erverseness seemed ungra
teful, considering the undeniable good usage and indulge nce he had received fro
m me. Again I sat ruminating what I should do. Mortified as I was at his behavio
r, and resolved as I had been to dismiss him when I enter ed my office, neverthe
less I strangely felt something superstitious knocking at my heart, and forbiddi
ng me to carry out my purpose, and denouncing me for a vil lain if I dared to br
eathe one bitter word against this forlornest of mankind. A t last, familiarly d
rawing my chair behind his screen, I sat down and said: ``Ba rtleby, never mind 
then about revealing your history; but let me entreat you, as a friend, to compl
y as far as may be with the usages of this office. Say now yo u will help to exa
mine papers to-morrow or next day: in short, say now that in a day or two you wi
ll begin to be a little reasonable:-say so, Bartleby.'' ``At p resent I would pr
efer not to be a little reasonable,'' was his mildly cadaverous reply. Just then
 the folding-doors opened, and Nippers approached. He seemed su ffering from an 
unusually bad night's rest, induced by severer indigestion than common. He overh
eard those final words of Bartleby. ``Prefer not, eh?'' gritted Nippers-``I'd pr
efer him, if I were you, sir,'' addressing me-``I'd prefer him; I'd give him pre
ferences, the stubborn mule! What is it, sir, pray, that he pref ers not to do n
ow?'' Bartleby moved not a limb. ``Mr. Nippers,'' said I, ``I'd p refer that you
 would withdraw for the present.'' Somehow, of late I had got into the way of in
voluntarily using this word ``prefer'' upon all sorts of not exact ly suitable o
ccasions. And I trembled to think that my contact with the scrivene r had alread
y and seriously affected me in a mental way. And what further and de eper aberra
tion might it not yet produce? This apprehension had not been without efficacy i
n determining me to summary means. As Nippers, looking very sour and sulky, was 
departing, Turkey blandly and deferentially approached. ``With submis sion, sir,
'' said he, ``yesterday I was thinking about Bartleby here, and I thin k that if
 he would but prefer to take a quart of good ale every day, it would do much tow
ards mending him, and enabling him to assist in examining his papers.'' ``So you
 have got the word too,'' said I, slightly excited. ``With submission, what word
, sir,'' asked Turkey, respectfully crowding himself into the contracte d space 
behind the screen, and by so doing, making me jostle the scrivener. ``Wh at word
, sir?'' ``I would prefer to be left alone here,'' said Bartleby, as if o ffende
d at being mobbed in his privacy. ``That's the word, Turkey,'' said I-``th at's 
it.'' ``Oh, prefer? oh yes-queer word. I never use it myself. But, sir, as I was
 saying, if he would but prefer-'' ``Turkey,'' interrupted I, ``you will pl ease
 withdraw.'' ``Oh certainly, sir, if you prefer that I should.'' As he opene d t
he folding-door to retire, Nippers at his desk caught a glimpse of me, and as ke
d whether I would prefer to have a certain paper copied on blue paper or white .
 He did not in the least roguishly accent the word prefer. It was plain that it 
involuntarily rolled from his tongue. I thought to myself, surely I must get ri 
d of a demented man, who already has in some degree turned the tongues, if not t
 he heads of myself and clerks. But I thought it prudent not to break the dismis
s ion at once. The next day I noticed that Bartleby did nothing but stand at his
 w indow in his dead-wall revery. Upon asking him why he did not write, he said 
tha t he had decided upon doing no more writing. ``Why, how now? what next?'' ex
clai med I, ``do no more writing?'' ``No more.'' ``And what is the reason?'' ``D
o you not see the reason for yourself,'' he indifferently replied. I looked stea
dfast ly at him, and perceived that his eyes looked dull and glazed. Instantly i
t occu rred to me, that his unexampled diligence in copying by his dim window fo
r the f irst few weeks of his stay with me might have temporarily impaired his v
ision. I was touched. I said something in condolence with him. I hinted that of 
course h e did wisely in abstaining from writing for a while; and urged him to e
mbrace th at opportunity of taking wholesome exercise in the open air. This, how
ever, he d id not do. A few days after this, my other clerks being absent, and b
eing in a g reat hurry to dispatch certain letters by the mail, I thought that, 
having nothi ng else earthly to do, Bartleby would surely be less inflexible tha
n usual, and carry these letters to the post-office. But he blankly declined. So
, much to my inconvenience, I went myself. Still added days went by. Whether Bar
tleby's eyes improved or not, I could not say. To all appearance, I thought they
 did. But whe n I asked him if they did, he vouchsafed no answer. At all events,
 he would do n o copying. At last, in reply to my urgings, he informed me that h
e had permanent ly given up copying. ``What!'' exclaimed I; ``suppose your eyes 
should get entir ely well-better than ever before-would you not copy then?'' ``I
 have given up co pying,'' he answered, and slid aside. He remained as ever, a f
ixture in my chamb er. Nay-if that were possible-he became still more of a fixtu
re than before. Wha t was to be done? He would do nothing in the office: why sho
uld he stay there? I n plain fact, he had now become a millstone to me, not only
 useless as a necklac e, but afflictive to bear. Yet I was sorry for him. I spea
k less than truth when I say that, on his own account, he occasioned me uneasine
ss. If he would but ha ve named a single relative or friend, I would instantly h
ave written, and urged their taking the poor fellow away to some convenient retr
eat. But he seemed alon e, absolutely alone in the universe. A bit of wreck in t
he mid Atlantic. At leng th, necessities connected with my business tyrannized o
ver all other considerati ons. Decently as I could, I told Bartleby that in six 
days' time he must uncondi tionally leave the office. I warned him to take measu
res, in the interval, for p rocuring some other abode. I offered to assist him i
n this endeavor, if he himse lf would but take the first step towards a removal.
 ``And when you finally quit me, Bartleby,'' added I, ``I shall see that you go 
not away entirely unprovided. Six days from this hour, remember.'' At the expira
tion of that period, I peeped behind the screen, and lo! Bartleby was there. I b
uttoned up my coat, balanced myself; advanced slowly towards him, touched his sh
oulder, and said, ``The time has come; you must quit this place; I am sorry for 
you; here is money; but you m ust go.'' ``I would prefer not,'' he replied, with
 his back still towards me. `` You must.'' He remained silent. Now I had an unbo
unded confidence in this man's common honesty. He had frequently restored to me 
sixpences and shillings careles sly dropped upon the floor, for I am apt to be v
ery reckless in such shirt-butto n affairs. The proceeding then which followed w
ill not be deemed extraordinary. ``Bartleby,'' said I, ``I owe you twelve dollar
s on account; here are thirty-two ; the odd twenty are yours.-Will you take it?'
' and I handed the bills towards h im. But he made no motion. ``I will leave the
m here then,'' putting them under a weight on the table. Then taking my hat and 
cane and going to the door I tranqu illy turned and added-``After you have remov
ed your things from these offices, B artleby, you will of course lock the door-s
ince every one is now gone for the da y but you-and if you please; slip your key
 underneath the mat, so that I may hav e it in the morning. I shall not see you 
again; so good-bye to you. If hereafter in your new place of abode I can be of a
ny service to you, do not fail to advis e me by letter. Good-bye, Bartleby, and 
fare you well.'' But he answered not a w ord; like the last column of some ruine
d temple, he remained standing mute and s olitary in the middle of the otherwise
 deserted room. As I walked home in a pens ive mood, my vanity got the better of
 my pity. I could not but highly plume myse lf on my masterly management in gett
ing rid of Bartleby. Masterly I call it, and such it must appear to any dispassi
onate thinker. The beauty of my procedure se emed to consist in its perfect quie
tness. There was no vulgar bullying, no brava do of any sort, no choleric hector
ing, and striding to and fro across the apartm ent, jerking out vehement command
s for Bartleby to bundle himself off with his b eggarly traps. Nothing of the ki
nd. Without loudly bidding Bartleby depart-as an inferior genius might have done
-I assumed the ground that depart he must; and u pon that assumption built all I
 had to say. The more I thought over my procedure , the more I was charmed with 
it. Nevertheless, next morning, upon awakening, I had my doubts,-I had somehow s
lept off the fumes of vanity. One of the coolest a nd wisest hours a man has, is
 just after he awakes in the morning. My procedure seemed as sagacious as ever,-
but only in theory. How it would prove in practice- there was the rub. It was tr
uly a beautiful thought to have assumed Bartleby's d eparture; but, after all, t
hat assumption was simply my own, and none of Bartleb y's. The great point was, 
not whether I had assumed that he would quit me, but w hether he would prefer so
 to do. He was more a man of preferences than assumptio ns. After breakfast, I w
alked down town, arguing the probabilities pro and con. One moment I thought it 
would prove a miserable failure, and Bartleby would be f ound all alive at my of
fice as usual; the next moment it seemed certain that I s hould see his chair em
pty. And so I kept veering about. At the corner of Broadwa y and Canal-street, I
 saw quite an excited group of people standing in earnest c onversation. ``I'll 
take odds he doesn't,'' said a voice as I passed. ``Doesn't go?-done!'' said I, 
``put up your money.'' I was instinctively putting my hand i n my pocket to prod
uce my own, when I remembered that this was an election day. The words I had ove
rheard bore no reference to Bartleby, but to the success or n on-success of some
 candidate for the mayoralty. In my intent frame of mind, I ha d, as it were, im
agined that all Broadway shared in my excitement, and were deba ting the same qu
estion with me. I passed on, very thankful that the uproar of th e street screen
ed my momentary absent-mindedness. As I had intended, I was earli er than usual 
at my office door. I stood listening for a moment. All was still. He must be gon
e. I tried the knob. The door was locked. Yes, my procedure had wo rked to a cha
rm; he indeed must be vanished. Yet a certain melancholy mixed with this: I was 
almost sorry for my brilliant success. I was fumbling under the doo r mat for th
e key, which Bartleby was to have left there for me, when accidental ly my knee 
knocked against a panel, producing a summoning sound, and in response a voice ca
me to me from within-``Not yet; I am occupied.'' It was Bartleby. I w as thunder
struck. For an instant I stood like the man who, pipe in mouth, was ki lled one 
cloudless afternoon long ago in Virginia, by summer lightning; at his o wn warm 
open window he was killed, and remained leaning out there upon the dream y after
noon, till some one touched him, when he fell. ``Not gone!'' I murmured a t last
. But again obeying that wondrous ascendancy which the inscrutable scriven er ha
d over me, and from which ascendency, for all my chafing, I could not compl etel
y escape, I slowly went down stairs and out into the street, and while walki ng 
round the block, considered what I should next do in this unheard-of perplexi ty
. Turn the man out by an actual thrusting I could not; to drive him away by ca l
ling him hard names would not do; calling in the police was an unpleasant idea; 
and yet, permit him to enjoy his cadaverous triumph over me,-this too I could n 
ot think of. What was to be done? or, if nothing could be done, was there any th
 ing further that I could assume in the matter? Yes, as before I had prospective
l y assumed that Bartleby would depart, so now I might retrospectively assume th
at departed he was. In the legitimate carrying out of this assumption, I might e
nt er my office in a great hurry, and pretending not to see Bartleby at all, wal
k s traight against him as if he were air. Such a proceeding would in a singular
 deg ree have the appearance of a home-thrust. It was hardly possible that Bartl
eby c ould withstand such an application of the doctrine of assumptions. But upo
n seco nd thoughts the success of the plan seemed rather dubious. I resolved to 
argue t he matter over with him again. ``Bartleby,'' said I, entering the office
, with a quietly severe expression, ``I am seriously displeased. I am pained, Ba
rtleby. I had thought better of you. I had imagined you of such a gentlemanly or
ganizati on, that in any delicate dilemma a slight hint would suffice-in short, 
an assump tion. But it appears I am deceived. Why,'' I added, unaffectedly start
ing, ``you have not even touched that money yet,'' pointing to it, just where I 
had left i t the evening previous. He answered nothing. ``Will you, or will you 
not, quit m e?'' I now demanded in a sudden passion, advancing close to him. ``I
 would prefe r not to quit you,'' he replied, gently emphasizing the not. ``What
 earthly righ t have you to stay here? Do you pay any rent? Do you pay my taxes?
 Or is this pr operty yours?'' He answered nothing. ``Are you ready to go on and
 write now? Are your eyes recovered? Could you copy a small paper for me this mo
rning? or help examine a few lines? or step round to the post-office? In a word,
 will you do an y thing at all, to give a coloring to your refusal to depart the
 premises?'' He silently retired into his hermitage. I was now in such a state o
f nervous resent ment that I thought it but prudent to check myself at present f
rom further demon strations. Bartleby and I were alone. I remembered the tragedy
 of the unfortunat e Adams and the still more unfortunate Colt in the solitary o
ffice of the latter ; and how poor Colt, being dreadfully incensed by Adams, and
 imprudently permitt ing himself to get wildly excited, was at unawares hurried 
into his fatal act-an act which certainly no man could possibly deplore more tha
n the actor himself. Often it had occurred to me in my ponderings upon the subje
ct, that had that alt ercation taken place in the public street, or at a private
 residence, it would n ot have terminated as it did. It was the circumstance of 
being alone in a solita ry office, up stairs, of a building entirely unhallowed 
by humanizing domestic a ssociations-an uncarpeted office, doubtless, of a dusty
, haggard sort of appeara nce;-this it must have been, which greatly helped to e
nhance the irritable despe ration of the hapless Colt. But when this old Adam of
 resentment rose in me and tempted me concerning Bartleby, I grappled him and th
rew him. How? Why, simply b y recalling the divine injunction: ``A new commandme
nt give I unto you, that ye love one another.'' Yes, this it was that saved me. 
Aside from higher considerat ions, charity often operates as a vastly wise and p
rudent principle-a great safe guard to its possessor. Men have committed murder 
for jealousy's sake, and anger 's sake, and hatred's sake, and selfishness' sake
, and spiritual pride's sake; b ut no man that ever I heard of, ever committed a
 diabolical murder for sweet cha rity's sake. Mere self-interest, then, if no be
tter motive can be enlisted, shou ld, especially with high-tempered men, prompt 
all beings to charity and philanth ropy. At any rate, upon the occasion in quest
ion, I strove to drown my exasperat ed feelings towards the scrivener by benevol
ently constructing his conduct. Poor fellow, poor fellow! thought I, he don't me
an any thing; and besides, he has se en hard times, and ought to be indulged. I 
endeavored also immediately to occupy myself, and at the same time to comfort my
 despondency. I tried to fancy that i n the course of the morning, at such time 
as might prove agreeable to him, Bartl eby, of his own free accord, would emerge
 from his hermitage, and take up some d ecided line of march in the direction of
 the door. But no. Half-past twelve o'cl ock came; Turkey began to glow in the f
ace, overturn his inkstand, and become ge nerally obstreperous; Nippers abated d
own into quietude and courtesy; Ginger Nut munched his noon apple; and Bartleby 
remained standing at his window in one of his profoundest dead-wall reveries. Wi
ll it be credited? Ought I to acknowledge it? That afternoon I left the office w
ithout saying one further word to him. Som e days now passed, during which, at l
eisure intervals I looked a little into ``E dwards on the Will,'' and ``Priestle
y on Necessity.'' Under the circumstances, t hose books induced a salutary feeli
ng. Gradually I slid into the persuasion that these troubles of mine touching th
e scrivener, had been all predestinated from eternity, and Bartleby was billeted
 upon me for some mysterious purpose of an al l-wise Providence, which it was no
t for a mere mortal like me to fathom. Yes, Ba rtleby, stay there behind your sc
reen, thought I; I shall persecute you no more; you are harmless and noiseless a
s any of these old chairs; in short, I never fe el so private as when I know you
 are here. At least I see it, I feel it; I penet rate to the predestinated purpo
se of my life. I am content. Others may have loft ier parts to enact; but my mis
sion in this world, Bartleby, is to furnish you wi th office-room for such perio
d as you may see fit to remain. I believe that this wise and blessed frame of mi
nd would have continued with me, had it not been fo r the unsolicited and unchar
itable remarks obtruded upon me by my professional f riends who visited the room
s. But thus it often is, that the constant friction o f illiberal minds wears ou
t at last the best resolves of the more generous. Thou gh to be sure, when I ref
lected upon it, it was not strange that people entering my office should be stru
ck by the peculiar aspect of the unaccountable Bartleby , and so be tempted to t
hrow out some sinister observations concerning him. Some times an attorney havin
g business with me, and calling at my office, and finding no one but the scriven
er there, would undertake to obtain some sort of precise information from him to
uching my whereabouts; but without heeding his idle talk, Bartleby would remain 
standing immovable in the middle of the room. So after co ntemplating him in tha
t position for a time, the attorney would depart, no wiser than he came. Also, w
hen a Reference was going on, and the room full of lawyers and witnesses and bus
iness was driving fast; some deeply occupied legal gentlem an present, seeing Ba
rtleby wholly unemployed, would request him to run round to his (the legal gentl
eman's) office and fetch some papers for him. Thereupon, Ba rtleby would tranqui
lly decline, and yet remain idle as before. Then the lawyer would give a great s
tare, and turn to me. And what could I say? At last I was ma de aware that all t
hrough the circle of my professional acquaintance, a whisper of wonder was runni
ng round, having reference to the strange creature I kept at my office. This wor
ried me very much. And as the idea came upon me of his possib ly turning out a l
ong-lived man, and keep occupying my chambers, and denying my authority; and per
plexing my visitors; and scandalizing my professional reputati on; and casting a
 general gloom over the premises; keeping soul and body togethe r to the last up
on his savings (for doubtless he spent but half a dime a day), a nd in the end p
erhaps outlive me, and claim possession of my office by right of his perpetual o
ccupancy: as all these dark anticipations crowded upon me more an d more, and my
 friends continually intruded their relentless remarks upon the ap parition in m
y room; a great change was wrought in me. I resolved to gather all my faculties 
together, and for ever rid me of this intolerable incubus. Ere revo lving any co
mplicated project, however, adapted to this end, I first simply sugg ested to Ba
rtleby the propriety of his permanent departure. In a calm and seriou s tone, I 
commended the idea to his careful and mature consideration. But having taken thr
ee days to meditate upon it, he apprised me that his original determin ation rem
ained the same; in short, that he still preferred to abide with me. Wha t shall 
I do? I now said to myself, buttoning up my coat to the last button. Wha t shall
 I do? what ought I to do? what does conscience say I should do with this man, o
r rather ghost. Rid myself of him, I must; go, he shall. But how? You wil l not 
thrust him, the poor, pale, passive mortal,-you will not thrust such a hel pless
 creature out of your door? you will not dishonor yourself by such cruelty? No, 
I will not, I cannot do that. Rather would I let him live and die here, and then
 mason up his remains in the wall. What then will you do? For all your coax ing,
 he will not budge. Bribes he leaves under your own paper-weight on your tab le;
 in short, it is quite plain that he prefers to cling to you. Then something sev
ere, something unusual must be done. What! surely you will not have him colla re
d by a constable, and commit his innocent pallor to the common jail? And upon wh
at ground could you procure such a thing to be done?-a vagrant, is he? What! h e
 a vagrant, a wanderer, who refuses to budge? It is because he will not be a va 
grant, then, that you seek to count him as a vagrant. That is too absurd. No vis
 ible means of support: there I have him. Wrong again: for indubitably he does s
u pport himself, and that is the only unanswerable proof that any man can show o
f his possessing the means so to do. No more then. Since he will not quit me, I 
mu st quit him. I will change my offices; I will move elsewhere; and give him fa
ir notice, that if I find him on my new premises I will then proceed against him
 as a common trespasser. Acting accordingly, next day I thus addressed him: ``I 
fin d these chambers too far from the City Hall; the air is unwholesome. In a wo
rd, I propose to remove my offices next week, and shall no longer require your s
ervi ces. I tell you this now, in order that you may seek another place.'' He ma
de no reply, and nothing more was said. On the appointed day I engaged carts and
 men, proceeded to my chambers, and having but little furniture, every thing was
 remo ved in a few hours. Throughout, the scrivener remained standing behind the
 scree n, which I directed to be removed the last thing. It was withdrawn; and b
eing fo lded up like a huge folio, left him the motionless occupant of a naked r
oom. I s tood in the entry watching him a moment, while something from within me
 upbraide d me. I re-entered, with my hand in my pocket-and-and my heart in my m
outh. ``Go od-bye, Bartleby; I am going-good-bye, and God some way bless you; an
d take that ,'' slipping something in his hand. But it dropped upon the floor, a
nd then,-str ange to say-I tore myself from him whom I had so longed to be rid o
f. Establishe d in my new quarters, for a day or two I kept the door locked, and
 started at ev ery footfall in the passages. When I returned to my rooms after a
ny little absen ce, I would pause at the threshold for an instant, and attentive
ly listen, ere a pplying my key. But these fears were needless. Bartleby never c
ame nigh me. I th ought all was going well, when a perturbed looking stranger vi
sited me, inquirin g whether I was the person who had recently occupied rooms at
 No.-Wall-street. F ull of forebodings, I replied that I was. ``Then sir,'' said
 the stranger, who p roved a lawyer, ``you are responsible for the man you left 
there. He refuses to do any copying; he refuses to do any thing; he says he pref
ers not to; and he re fuses to quit the premises.'' ``I am very sorry, sir,'' sa
id I, with assumed tra nquillity, but an inward tremor, ``but, really, the man y
ou allude to is nothing to me-he is no relation or apprentice of mine, that you 
should hold me responsi ble for him.'' ``In mercy's name, who is he?'' ``I certa
inly cannot inform you. I know nothing about him. Formerly I employed him as a c
opyist; but he has done nothing for me now for some time past.'' ``I shall settl
e him then,-good morning , sir.'' Several days passed, and I heard nothing more;
 and though I often felt a charitable prompting to call at the place and see poo
r Bartleby, yet a certain squeamishness of I know not what withheld me. All is o
ver with him, by this tim e, thought I at last, when through another week no fur
ther intelligence reached me. But coming to my room the day after, I found sever
al persons waiting at my d oor in a high state of nervous excitement. ``That's t
he man-here he comes,'' cri ed the foremost one, whom I recognized as the lawyer
 who had previously called u pon me alone. ``You must take him away, sir, at onc
e,'' cried a portly person am ong them, advancing upon me, and whom I knew to be
 the landlord of No.-Wall-stre et. ``These gentlemen, my tenants, cannot stand i
t any longer; Mr. B--'' pointin g to the lawyer, ``has turned him out of his roo
m, and he now persists in haunti ng the building generally, sitting upon the ban
isters of the stairs by day, and sleeping in the entry by night. Every body is c
oncerned; clients are leaving the offices; some fears are entertained of a mob; 
something you must do, and that w ithout delay.'' Aghast at this torrent, I fell
 back before it, and would fain ha ve locked myself in my new quarters. In vain 
I persisted that Bartleby was nothi ng to me-no more than to any one else. In va
in:-I was the last person known to h ave any thing to do with him, and they held
 me to the terrible account. Fearful then of being exposed in the papers (as one
 person present obscurely threatened) I considered the matter, and at length sai
d, that if the lawyer would give me a confidential interview with the scrivener,
 in his (the lawyer's) own room, I wo uld that afternoon strive my best to rid t
hem of the nuisance they complained of . Going up stairs to my old haunt, there 
was Bartleby silently sitting upon the banister at the landing. ``What are you d
oing here, Bartleby?'' said I. ``Sittin g upon the banister,'' he mildly replied
. I motioned him into the lawyer's room, who then left us. ``Bartleby,'' said I,
 ``are you aware that you are the cause of great tribulation to me, by persistin
g in occupying the entry after being dis missed from the office?'' No answer. ``
Now one of two things must take place. Ei ther you must do something, or somethi
ng must be done to you. Now what sort of b usiness would you like to engage in? 
Would you like to re-engage in copying for some one?'' ``No; I would prefer not 
to make any change.'' ``Would you like a cl erkship in a dry-goods store?'' ``Th
ere is too much confinement about that. No, I would not like a clerkship; but I 
am not particular.'' ``Too much confinement, '' I cried, ``why you keep yourself
 confined all the time!'' ``I would prefer no t to take a clerkship,'' he rejoin
ed, as if to settle that little item at once. ``How would a bar-tender's busines
s suit you? There is no trying of the eyesight in that.'' ``I would not like it 
at all; though, as I said before, I am not par ticular.'' His unwonted wordiness
 inspirited me. I returned to the charge. ``Wel l then, would you like to travel
 through the country collecting bills for the me rchants? That would improve you
r health.'' ``No, I would prefer to be doing some thing else.'' ``How then would
 going as a companion to Europe, to entertain some young gentleman with your con
versation,-how would that suit you?'' ``Not at all . It does not strike me that 
there is any thing definite about that. I like to b e stationary. But I am not p
articular.'' ``Stationary you shall be then,'' I cri ed, now losing all patience
, and for the first time in all my exasperating conne ction with him fairly flyi
ng into a passion. ``If you do not go away from these premises before night, I s
hall feel bound-indeed I am bound-to-to-to quit the pr emises myself!'' I rather
 absurdly concluded, knowing not with what possible thr eat to try to frighten h
is immobility into compliance. Despairing of all further efforts, I was precipit
ately leaving him, when a final thought occurred to me-o ne which had not been w
holly unindulged before. ``Bartleby,'' said I, in the kin dest tone I could assu
me under such exciting circumstances, ``will you go home w ith me now-not to my 
office, but my dwelling-and remain there till we can conclu de upon some conveni
ent arrangement for you at our leisure? Come, let us start n ow, right away.'' `
`No: at present I would prefer not to make any change at all. '' I answered noth
ing; but effectually dodging every one by the suddenness and r apidity of my fli
ght, rushed from the building, ran up Wall-street towards Broad way, and jumping
 into the first omnibus was soon removed from pursuit. As soon a s tranquillity 
returned I distinctly perceived that I had now done all that I po ssibly could, 
both in respect to the demands of the landlord and his tenants, an d with regard
 to my own desire and sense of duty, to benefit Bartleby, and shiel d him from r
ude persecution. I now strove to be entirely care-free and quiescent ; and my co
nscience justified me in the attempt; though indeed it was not so suc cessful as
 I could have wished. So fearful was I of being again hunted out by th e incense
d landlord and his exasperated tenants, that, surrendering my business to Nipper
s, for a few days I drove about the upper part of the town and through the subur
bs, in my rockaway; crossed over to Jersey City and Hoboken, and paid f ugitive 
visits to Manhattanville and Astoria. In fact I almost lived in my rocka way for
 the time. When again I entered my office, lo, a note from the landlord l ay upo
n the desk. I opened it with trembling hands. It informed me that the writ er ha
d sent to the police, and had Bartleby removed to the Tombs as a vagrant. M oreo
ver, since I knew more about him than any one else, he wished me to appear a t t
hat place, and make a suitable statement of the facts. These tidings had a co nf
licting effect upon me. At first I was indignant; but at last almost approved. T
he landlord's energetic, summary disposition, had led him to adopt a procedure w
hich I do not think I would have decided upon myself; and yet as a last resort ,
 under such peculiar circumstances, it seemed the only plan. As I afterwards le 
arned, the poor scrivener, when told that he must be conducted to the Tombs, off
 ered not the slightest obstacle, but in his pale unmoving way, silently acquies
c ed. Some of the compassionate and curious bystanders joined the party; and hea
de d by one of the constables arm in arm with Bartleby, the silent procession fi
led its way through all the noise, and heat, and joy of the roaring thoroughfare
s a t noon. The same day I received the note I went to the Tombs, or to speak mo
re p roperly, the Halls of Justice. Seeking the right officer, I stated the purp
ose o f my call, and was informed that the individual I described was indeed wit
hin. I then assured the functionary that Bartleby was a perfectly honest man, an
d grea tly to be compassionated, however unaccountably eccentric. I narrated all
 I knew , and closed by suggesting the idea of letting him remain in as indulgen
t confin ement as possible till something less harsh might be done-though indeed
 I hardly knew what. At all events, if nothing else could be decided upon, the a
lms-house must receive him. I then begged to have an interview. Being under no d
isgracefu l charge, and quite serene and harmless in all his ways, they had perm
itted him freely to wander about the prison, and especially in the inclosed gras
s-platted yards thereof. And so I found him there, standing all alone in the qui
etest of t he yards, his face towards a high wall, while all around, from the na
rrow slits of the jail windows, I thought I saw peering out upon him the eyes of
 murderers and thieves. ``Bartleby!'' ``I know you,'' he said, without looking r
ound,-``and I want nothing to say to you.'' ``It was not I that brought you here
, Bartleby, '' said I, keenly pained at his implied suspicion. ``And to you, thi
s should not be so vile a place. Nothing reproachful attaches to you by being he
re. And see, it is not so sad a place as one might think. Look, there is the sky
, and here i s the grass.'' ``I know where I am,'' he replied, but would say not
hing more, an d so I left him. As I entered the corridor again, a broad meat-lik
e man, in an a pron, accosted me, and jerking his thumb over his shoulder said-`
`Is that your f riend?'' ``Yes.'' ``Does he want to starve? If he does, let him 
live on the pris on fare, that's all.'' ``Who are you?'' asked I, not knowing wh
at to make of suc h an unofficially speaking person in such a place. ``I am the 
grub-man. Such gen tlemen as have friends here, hire me to provide them with som
ething good to eat. '' ``Is this so?'' said I, turning to the turnkey. He said i
t was. ``Well then,' ' said I, slipping some silver into the grub-man's hands (f
or so they called him ). ``I want you to give particular attention to my friend 
there; let him have th e best dinner you can get. And you must be as polite to h
im as possible.'' ``Int roduce me, will you?'' said the grub-man, looking at me 
with an expression which seemed to say he was all impatience for an opportunity 
to give a specimen of hi s breeding. Thinking it would prove of benefit to the s
crivener, I acquiesced; a nd asking the grub-man his name, went up with him to B
artleby. ``Bartleby, this is Mr. Cutlets; you will find him very useful to you.'
' ``Your sarvant, sir, you r sarvant,'' said the grub-man, making a low salutati
on behind his apron. ``Hope you find it pleasant here, sir;-spacious grounds-coo
l apartments, sir-hope you' ll stay with us some time-try to make it agreeable. 
May Mrs. Cutlets and I have the pleasure of your company to dinner, sir, in Mrs.
 Cutlets' private room?'' `` I prefer not to dine to-day,'' said Bartleby, turni
ng away. ``It would disagree with me; I am unused to dinners.'' So saying he slo
wly moved to the other side o f the inclosure, and took up a position fronting t
he dead-wall. ``How's this?'' said the grub-man, addressing me with a stare of a
stonishment. ``He's odd, aint he?'' ``I think he is a little deranged,'' said I,
 sadly. ``Deranged? deranged i s it? Well now, upon my word, I thought that frie
nd of yourn was a gentleman for ger; they are always pale and genteel-like, them
 forgers. I can't help pity 'em- can't help it, sir. Did you know Monroe Edwards
?'' he added touchingly, and paus ed. Then, laying his hand pityingly on my shou
lder, sighed, ``he died of consump tion at Sing-Sing. So you weren't acquainted 
with Monroe?'' ``No, I was never so cially acquainted with any forgers. But I ca
nnot stop longer. Look to my friend yonder. You will not lose by it. I will see 
you again.'' Some few days after thi s, I again obtained admission to the Tombs,
 and went through the corridors in qu est of Bartleby; but without finding him. 
``I saw him coming from his cell not l ong ago,'' said a turnkey, ``may be he's 
gone to loiter in the yards.'' So I wen t in that direction. ``Are you looking f
or the silent man?'' said another turnke y passing me. ``Yonder he lies-sleeping
 in the yard there. 'Tis not twenty minut es since I saw him lie down.'' The yar
d was entirely quiet. It was not accessibl e to the common prisoners. The surrou
nding walls, of amazing thickness, kept off all sounds behind them. The Egyptian
 character of the masonry weighed upon me w ith its gloom. But a soft imprisoned
 turf grew under foot. The heart of the eter nal pyramids, it seemed, wherein, b
y some strange magic, through the clefts, gra ss-seed, dropped by birds, had spr
ung. Strangely huddled at the base of the wall , his knees drawn up, and lying o
n his side, his head touching the cold stones, I saw the wasted Bartleby. But no
thing stirred. I paused; then went close up to him; stooped over, and saw that h
is dim eyes were open; otherwise he seemed prof oundly sleeping. Something promp
ted me to touch him. I felt his hand, when a tin gling shiver ran up my arm and 
down my spine to my feet. The round face of the g rub-man peered upon me now. ``
His dinner is ready. Won't he dine to-day, either? Or does he live without dinin
g?'' ``Lives without dining,'' said I, and closed the eyes. ``Eh!-He's asleep, a
int he?'' ``With kings and counsellors,'' murmured I. There would seem little ne
ed for proceeding further in this history. Imagina tion will readily supply the 
meagre recital of poor Bartleby's interment. But er e parting with the reader, l
et me say, that if this little narrative has suffici ently interested him, to aw
aken curiosity as to who Bartleby was, and what manne r of life he led prior to 
the present narrator's making his acquaintance, I can only reply, that in such c
uriosity I fully share, but am wholly unable to gratif y it. Yet here I hardly k
now whether I should divulge one little item of rumor, which came to my ear a fe
w months after the scrivener's decease. Upon what basis it rested, I could never
 ascertain; and hence, how true it is I cannot now tell . But inasmuch as this v
ague report has not been without a certain strange sugge stive interest to me, h
owever said, it may prove the same with some others; and so I will briefly menti
on it. The report was this: that Bartleby had been a subo rdinate clerk in the D
ead Letter Office at Washington, from which he had been su ddenly removed by a c
hange in the administration. When I think over this rumor, I cannot adequately e
xpress the emotions which seize me. Dead letters! does it n ot sound like dead m
en? Conceive a man by nature and misfortune prone to a palli d hopelessness, can
 any business seem more fitted to heighten it than that of co ntinually handling
 these dead letters, and assorting them for the flames? For by the cart-load the
y are annually burned. Sometimes from out the folded paper the pale clerk takes 
a ring:-the finger it was meant for, perhaps, moulders in the grave; a bank-note
 sent in swiftest charity:-he whom it would relieve, nor eats nor hungers any mo
re; pardon for those who died despairing; hope for those who d ied unhoping; goo
d tidings for those who died stifled by unrelieved calamities. On errands of lif
e, these letters speed to death.